because some of them will just i mean
you guys will hopefully realize this too
that you just don't have to live like
this it's like
you know like you can fix this like you
can feel
better on a day-to-day basis like the
sun can be a little bit brighter you can
be a little bit happier
you can just enjoy things more
so about one year ago we had a pretty
significant suicide in the gaming
community and i think we've had
over the last year um we've had
a lot of suicides in our community i
think some of them are not quite as
advertised as others
and so i thought what we would do today
is try to just do like a quick
um sort of like educational segment to
help us understand
suicide so today what i'd like to talk
to you guys about is just sort of like a
quick
almost like lecture about you know who
commits suicide
why people commit suicide how like
what's the process or what we
what do we understand about the how of
suicide and what you can do
either for yourself or for someone else
so we're just going to answer these four
basic questions and the reason that i
think that this
this kind of lecture is important is if
you look at medicine
um it's advancing and we're winning as a
profession
so if you look at for example like hiv
so hiv used to be a terminal
illness and now people with hiv have a
regular life expectancy
we've all but eliminated some kinds of
cancer
um at least in terms of people who get
the appropriate treatment so for example
there are certain kinds of like b-cell
lymphomas if i'm remembering correctly
that we now have targeted antibodies
that we have really good
outcomes for we also have for example
like hpv vaccines which have done a huge
job at sort of reducing or almost
eliminating cervical cancer at least in
countries that have access to the
vaccine so we're
like we're doing good like i don't know
if you guys get this but like modern
medicine is pretty dope like do you guys
understand that
if my heart is busted i can like
literally get a heart from someone else
and we can transplant into my body and
then i can continue to live a relatively
normal life
if my kidneys are busted i can literally
like
transplant someone else's kidney into my
kidney
i mean into my body and then like i can
live off of that kidney
so like medical science has advanced in
an amazing rate and it is like really
awesome so we're seeing
generally speaking improved outcomes
in most disciplines or just about every
discipline of medicine
the one place where we don't seem to be
doing a good job and in fact arguably
things are getting worse
is in the mental health realm so we are
sort of losing the war
against mental illness and so if we look
at suicide for example like suicides
have not
appreciably gone down in fact if i
remember correctly they've sort of gone
up over time
um it's also kind of staggering because
uh you know if you look at statistics on
suicide like 80
of suicides are men if i'm remembering
correctly i think that's kind of a
ballpark figure
depending on what source you kind of go
to it'll
you know that the numbers may look a
little bit different depending on
whether you're looking at the world
or a particular country developed
countries versus developing countries
have slightly different um statistics
around that
and and so we're we're losing this war
and so like
i don't really know that just given the
nature of the human mind i don't know
that we're gonna have like a
pharmaceutical
revelation like we're not gonna have
some kind of pharmaceutical discovery i
mean if we do that would be great
that you're gonna take a pill and it
will
cure you of your suicidality like we
certainly have medications that
improve outcomes for people with
depression who you know may be somewhat
protective against suicidality
so we'll talk a little bit about that
but as we'll see today the reasons that
people kill themselves may not all be
solved
by medication so the reason that i'd
like to talk to you guys about suicide
today is because i think that like the
first step in
in fighting this war is actually like
education right so like kind of like sun
tzu says
you know you have to know your enemy in
order to win and so my hope today is to
educate
our community and whoever's listening
whoever watches this down the road
to help you understand a little bit
about like okay who
kills themselves why do they kill
themselves how do they kill themselves
and what can we do about it
whether you are dealing with suicidal
thoughts or you're not dealing with
suicide or a friend is dealing with
suicidal thoughts
furthermore we're going to tackle a
couple of different myths around
suicidality
and some of these i think are quite
dangerous so it's really more of like a
public health educational approach
and i will urge you for the first but
not the last time that if you're dealing
with suicidal thoughts
you should really go see a licensed
professional and get help
and we'll deal with some of the reasons
why people don't and why it's a bad idea
to listen to the part of your mind that
says
basically i haven't killed myself yet so
i can manage it
which we'll we'll look at some
interesting data around that
so the first question is who kills
themselves so what we what we can sort
of discover like i sort of mentioned if
you actually look at suicidal attempts
what you discover is that more women
arguably
attempt suicide than men
but it turns out that when we kind of
when we're sort of looking at it
attempts what we sort of discover is
that not all suicide
looking behavior is actually like
intended to be suicidal
so sometimes for example like i've had
patients that will
take a bunch of pills and then will
proceed to call me
or they will call a friend and they'll
say hey i just took a bunch of pills
so it's sort of a suicide attempt but
there's sort of like this kind of
idea that like sometimes it's people are
looking you know to say goodbye but
sometimes they're actually like
it's a little bit more provocative and
it's sort of almost like a cry for help
you're sort of demonstrating to people
that um you really need help and you're
willing to go to drastic measures but at
the same time you're not like
you're not using your full faculty
of thinking to actually commit suicide
and so what we sort of discover is that
when you really tunnel down into the
research there are a lot of parasuicidal
behaviors
so things like cutting or self-injurious
behavior
or like threats for suicide attempts
that it seems like statistically
we're not entirely sure about you know
what's happening where but
women seem to make more suicide attempts
and men
seem to actually kill themselves uh more
often
and so the about four out of five
suicides are men so sometimes
as we look at the research what we sort
of like look at so one hypothesis is
that the manner of suicide sort of
determines
is responsible for that statistic so for
example women are more likely to
try to commit suicide by taking pills
and men are more likely to commit
suicide by using a firearm
and if we just sort of think about that
from a medical standpoint if someone
tries to commit them
commit suicide via pills the window to
save that person is far
larger than someone who you know uses a
gun because like
you know it's just gg depending so some
people have argued that because of the
variance in attempts
uh that's what sort of alters the
statistic in my experience i think it's
a little bit more complicated than that
and i think that um as we get to the
reasons of why
people commit suicide i suspect that
at least in my clinical experience and i
also suspect that epidemiologically that
men uh there are more men who are more
serious about taking their life
than women on average it doesn't mean
that women aren't serious about taking
their life i'm just saying that
that there seems to be something
different there which i think is sort of
borne out in the statistics
could it have to do with just the manner
and psychologically both genders are
exactly the same it's completely
possible
in fact there's good evidence for that
theory my experience as a clinician and
we'll get to the kind of the how
or sorry the why and we'll sort of see
that suicidality also is not necessarily
due to psychopathology which i know
sounds weird but it's not all
suicidality is due to mental illness
so let's talk a little bit more about
who commits suicide so
um you know men tend to be more of four
out of five
are men i think we're seeing a rise in
suicidality like
in younger populations as well just as
other kind of interesting examples one
is that there's a black box warning
on antidepressant medications called
serotonin selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors
that for the few weeks after you start
taking an ssri
adolescents especially are more likely
to commit suicide
there's something really interesting
there that like if you kind of think
about you know the mind of someone who
may be suicidal you may have thoughts
but if you're severely depressed
your low energy level and your like lack
of motivation
combined with the suicidal thoughts is
almost like a protective mechanism
that you may want to kill yourself but
you have such low energy or your
motivation is so low
that you never actually like get up off
your ass and and make an attempt
so there's a really interesting
phenomenon that's been observed when you
actually treat someone with depression
with
or treat adolescents with depression
with medication
is that there's actually a temporary
spike in
suicidal behavior which suggests that
and the best
kind of theory that i've heard is that
this the spike actually happens because
you're sort of dealing with that
motivation first
so people actually get a little bit more
energy but the suicidal thoughts take
longer to treat
and so if if you really have to be
careful if you're a prescriber and
you're prescribing antidepressants to
someone in adolescence to really watch
them carefully for like two weeks
and then it seems like the effect kind
of goes away in terms of like then it
really starts treating the suicidal
thoughts and depression as well
but it's a really interesting thing for
you guys to be aware of that if you're
starting antidepressant medication
so here's kind of like the first kind of
like psa um
is be a little bit careful because there
may be something weird going on in the
suicidal thoughts i don't know if they
become stronger
or you may actually feel like a little
bit more motivated to act on them which
is kind of weird
right so it seems like younger people
tend to be
committing suicide more often so it
seems to be getting slightly worse
and it seems to be men more than women
so when we look at something like the
gamer community we don't really have
a good idea about you know who
like what the suicide rate is
specifically in our community at least i
haven't seen
any convincing research in that we don't
really know but hopefully over time
we'll learn more about that and we'll
figure out how to intervene a little bit
better so now what i'd like to do is
actually screen share for a minute
and we have an awesome one of our
coaches
is actually a suicide researcher and so
he's done awesome work as a coach
and kind of does research on the side so
he put together an awesome presentation
to educate our coaches and what i'd love
to do is
um you know he goes by james
so um james has done an awesome job of
putting this together this presentation
and so what i'd love to do is share like
one or two slides from the presentation
with y'all
okay so let's kind of start with this
so suicide is the 10th leading cause of
death in the united states with about 50
000 people dying by suicide i think this
number has actually gone up a little bit
since the presentation was made
um this is the key thing so our pop you
know
when we talk about like who the audience
is of people who uh who
watch stream and who healthy gamer
reaches we tend to reach people who are
like
you know hopefully like 13 to 40 for the
most part but a lot of parents watch our
stream now too
so when we think about you know what is
the most likely thing that will kill you
i think it is probably accidents is
number one the leading cause of death
and number two is suicide and so
um if we kind of look at like
this is an important graphic so trends
in the leading cause of death
over time in the usa so this is usa
specific
what we kind of see is like i was saying
earlier like we're we're winning the war
against like stroke heart disease cancer
but suicide i don't know if this is
actually this isn't interesting
i'd have to double check this this
particular statistic whether this is a
increase because the causes of death of
other things are
getting better so the percentage
increase is higher but generally
speaking i think
suicide has been increasing over time
which i feel pretty confident to say
the next thing that we're going to kind
of talk about so that's sort of like who
commits suicide so
you know we need to be really careful
about that in this community
the next thing that i want to talk about
is why people commit suicide
so this is going to sound kind of weird
but there are many reasons why people
commit suicide that may not necessarily
have to do with psychopathology okay
so um there's a great paper by
a guy named malzberger so malzberger is
a
is like a great suicide researcher and
so if you actually sit down and you talk
to people who
are um have tried to commit suicide or
thinking about suicide and i've sort of
definitely noticed this as a clinician
what you're what i was really shocked to
discover is that
the reasons are not necessarily mental
illness so we sort of think about mental
illness as the number one cause of
suicide and i think that that's probably
reasonable
and yet i know it sounds kind of weird
but like
psychopathology isn't necessarily the
only cause of suicide
and what i mean by that is that if you
actually talk to people what you'll find
is there are all kinds of
reasons um and some of them have to do
with like
you know self-worth which is that like
an organic brain disease i'm not really
sure
sometimes suicide has to do with like
not having
a way out for lack of a better term
and so suicide sort of serves as an
escape
and so i think we have to be really
careful about sort of
assuming any suicidal behavior is the
has a root cause of mental illness
because if we misdiagnose that
if we assume that everything is mental
illness what i think we
end up doing is like we're gonna leave
out
and we're gonna lose sight of a lot of
important reasons why people kill
themselves
so as a clinician what i'd like to do is
kind of start with this idea okay so the
first thing to understand is that
suicidality
is not an illness it's actually a
symptom
okay and so what what do i mean by that
so if we think about like
fever for example like fever is not an
illness
it's actually a symptom that can have
all kinds of different root causes
so if i have a fever maybe i have a
lymphoma
maybe i have a cold maybe i have covid
maybe i have lupus there are many
different diseases that lead to fever
and so in that way if i have suicidal
thoughts
there are actually many different
reasons why i may feel suicidal
so for example one reason is
psychopathology
so what we mean by this is we know that
there are some kinds of mental illnesses
right so we know that there are things
like
depression or actually this is
incorrect major depressive disorder is
is better
right so there's like major depressive
disorder bipolar disorder
we also know that you have like things
like addictions
sometimes you'll have things like
schizophrenia right
and these are like arguably biological
organic malfunctions in your brain
that lead to a malfunction in your brain
that sort of allows you to create
suicidal thoughts and potentially act on
suicidal thoughts
but if you kind of uh another really
interesting thing and i don't know that
this mechanism is the same
so um so like this is what malzberger
cause
calls loss of the ideal self-state
or broken life dream
so some people will have like let's say
like
aspirations right so they say like i
want to be this or i want to be this
and something will happen in their life
where they feel like their
life has become broken and irreparable
and if you really talk to them so a lot
of people will assume
that this thing from a mechanism
standpoint
is the same as major depressive disorder
but as a clinician what i oftentimes
find is people who have major depressive
disorder will become depressed
even when nothing is wrong so especially
when i've worked with people who are
like uh
suicidal sometimes i don't actually like
do they qualify as depressed absolutely
but sometimes they don't really respond
to medications and what it really is is
like
their perception of life has become so
shattered
that they don't believe it is worth
living now the this further gets
complicated that sometimes
this can actually trigger a major
depressive episode
but it's not that the major depressive
episode is like shattering your
i mean it can actually go both ways but
i know it sounds kind of weird but in my
experience sometimes as someone like so
for example
um you know i was working with a
particular person
who was accused of um sexual
harassment and was essentially like
fired from their law firm or put on
suspension
and they were it was sort of a situation
where it was kind of like guilty until
proven innocent they were sort of
ostracized
it turned out that um you know they
didn't actually do anything
inappropriate
but their life was sort of shattered
like they lost their job like
they had lost the respect of their
colleagues and so like this person's
life had fallen apart i don't know that
this was actually the result
of an organic brain disease i don't know
that it was
the cause was like a neurochemical
imbalance
but it really feels to me more like a
broken life dream
there are other kinds of weird
psychoanalytic sort of stuff
but other other causes of suicidality
are going to be
sudden defense breakdown so what do we
mean by this
so sometimes we have something called
chronic suicidality
and what that means is like i have um
you know i think about killing myself
and even though i think about killing
myself there are a lot of things like a
lot of people so suicidal thoughts are
remarkably common i think something
between like 10 and 30 percent of the
population
has suicidal thoughts or has had
suicidal thoughts at some point
and so if we kind of think about it
suicidality is actually like a balance
between
pro-suicidal factors and
anti-suicidal factors and we'll get to
that in a second in terms of how we deal
with suicidality
but sometimes what can happen is that
like you know you've got this balance
between like reasons that you don't want
to live and reasons that you do want to
live
and sometimes that defense mechanism
one of the things that you kind of use
to hold the suicidality at bay
kind of falls apart so like a good
example of this that i'll sort of use is
like alcohol usage
so you know in your normal mind
you can kind of keep the suicidality at
bay
but in some situations if you like alter
you know your state of consciousness
through alcohol
or some other disinhibiting substance
the suicidality can kind of break
through
and then you can sort of result you know
can it can end in an attempt
so i know it sounds kind of weird it's
not necessarily like you know you can
say that addiction is like an organic
disease
but alcohol in a temporary sense this
isn't an addiction this is just like
i can be not addicted to alcohol use
some mind-altering substance
and then it causes something in my
psychology that
keeps the suicide at bay from like fall
it kind of breaks down my defense
mechanism and i end up acting
so and i know it sounds kind of weird
but like just you don't have to have
major depressive disorder to have
suicidal thoughts
so the next thing to kind of think about
in terms of why people commit suicide is
anger turned against the self so if we
think about why people commit suicide
some people
find their life to be like intolerable
right like
this life is not worth living anymore
and sometimes if you go back to freud's
earliest theories
on depression i believe it was freud
although i may be misquoting here
um who basically said that he he sort of
discovered that depression
is anger turned against the self so like
instead of being angry at the outside
world like if you look at the mind of a
depressed person they're actually like
angry towards themselves so if i get
fired from my job
instead of blaming my boss for being
incompetent or feeling threatened by my
competence
which may actually be the reason that i
got fired i what i'll end up doing is
blaming myself oh i'm so bad
i'm so dumb i can't do anything properly
like i deserve to be fired
and so sometimes in the case of um
suicidality what we actually see is
anger turned against the self with like
revengeful intent
so what this means is like sometimes we
have these ideas about ourselves that
are like
like i i am such a bad person
that like you almost want to like punish
yourself for being so bad
and this it's kind of really toxic but
if i really it's kind of sad but when i
work with some people
what i really find is that when people
have like this self-loathing and
self-hatred
they don't believe they deserve to get
better
they actually believe that they like
deserve punishment
and so sometimes suicidality is not
about like
oh woe is me i no longer have a life to
live sometimes it's not like a sudden
breakdown of a defense mechanism of like
a dynamic equilibrium
and sometimes what it is is like i
deserve to kill myself
because a pos like me doesn't deserve to
be alive
and so what we can kind of see is as you
talk as i've talked to people
you know i'll have someone like in the
mdd camp who for example is like
has a happy marriage and has a stable
job
and has like kids who love them and
despite
all of these positive factors they'll
still be suicidal
and so when i kind of see that like
that's when i really think about like
this seems to me like a malfunction this
is not supposed to be the way
that this person this person isn't
supposed to feel that way
right so if we think about a brain
malfunction
it's like your brain is not thinking the
way that it's supposed to be
but as you actually spend time with
people who are suicidal what you
actually find is that some people
like it sort of makes sense that they're
suicidal because their life really has
fallen apart
they really don't believe that there's
anything worth living for
and we may call that depression they may
get diagnosed with depression but i
don't know that this is like an
organic brain disease does it sort of a
chicken or egg situation or like the
brain and our psychology is complicated
and sometimes it's not that like life
isn't worth living
so this is sort of like life isn't
worth living okay
and then over here what we have is i
don't
deserve to live you guys see how like
these thoughts are different
and over here is like and over here what
we have is
i'm suicidal despite
life being great right and so these are
very different buckets
in terms of what goes on in the mind of
the person and then like
you know as we kind of go to other
options so like here's another kind of
like psychological manifestation
um but i'd kind of say that another one
is
intolerance
of humiliation shame
or envy and and so like this is kind of
i know it sounds kind of weird but like
this is sort of like a different bucket
if you think about the
emotion that's at play for these
different buckets like sometimes it's
like hopelessness
so if we look at the first column okay
so if we look at this column
okay this is transmitting so if you look
at this column this is hopelessness
this is going to be anger and this is
going to be shame
okay so these are going to be like a
little bit different
so the point here is that when we're
thinking about you know why
people want to kill themselves um
you know in what is the nature of their
suicidality what we sort of
arrive at is that they're actually like
a number of different reasons which are
not all the same
so this isn't just like one thing it's
not just mental illness that is causing
suicidality
and i think that it's the assumption
that like you know ssris will cure
suicidality
that despite the fact that our ssri
prescriptions have gone through the roof
over the last couple of decades
suicidal suicidality is still increasing
which sort of naturally
implies that um you know we're missing
something here
like as a profession and as a society
we're
missing something really important about
suicidality so if people are kind of
curious this is the the paper that i'm
pulling from which is
a sort of an an examination of a
particular narcissistic
person and different causes um and it's
by
uh elsa ronningstam igor weinberg and
um john maltzberger i think all these
maybe all three of these people are at
harvard that's number two
okay so we started off by talking about
you know who is vulnerable to suicide
the second thing is like why people kill
themselves and what we sort of discover
in terms of why people kill themselves
is that there's actually like a lot of
different reasons so sometimes it's
hopelessness sometimes it's anger
sometimes it's shame and humiliation and
some degree of envy
and i think each of these causes as we
sort of think about the differential
diagnosis of suicidality what we sort of
result in
is that different causes are going to
have different solutions so once again
if you're
feeling like killing yourself or you
have suicidal thoughts this is like
reason number two to go see a mental
health professional right like
understand that these things when you
work with someone can be addressed
so for the person who's hopeless you
know
we can sort of help them build a life
dream again
so a big part of what we try to do here
at healthygamer is like help people
construct a life
that is worth living our original goal
was like helping people with video game
addiction
and what we sort of found is the
antidote to video game addiction is
having a life that is worth living
in the real world and so as you build
that
life which can absolutely be done right
it takes time and it takes effort and
you may feel hopeless
but like with a little bit of help and
with a little bit of an intention you
will be amazed at what you're capable of
the biggest thing about people who are
hopeless is that they don't exert effort
right and so you can even beat yourself
up over that
so there can be some amount of
hopelessness there can be some amount of
anger and self-hatred i don't deserve to
live i don't deserve to be happy
and so that sort of has a different
solution as well in terms of like
learning how to gain compassion
right so sometimes we'll teach like
particular meditation techniques that
can help people like
learn how to love yourself and learn how
to forgive yourself
there's a lot of stuff about this and in
one of the dr k guides
um around you know anahat chakra
meditations and things like that
so like there are different antidotes to
that there's also things like shame and
envy which those tend to be some of the
hardest things to deal with like
they require a lot of self-reflection
because it's sort of like
you know there's some amount of you know
hopelessness is something that
we want to fix anger is something that
we want to replace
with compassion like we sort of want to
do that but when i deal with people who
are like really envious
and suicide at the suicidal because
someone else's life is like better than
theirs
that's really really hard to deal with
it requires a lot of self-reflection
because it's like people hold on to
their envy
so much more so now what we're going to
do is sort of talk a little bit about
um how people go about killing
themselves and understanding
sort of like a clinical approach to like
suicide risk assessment
and a couple of common myths that i want
you guys to be careful about
so the first thing to understand is that
psychiatrists are notoriously bad
at predicting whether someone is going
to kill themselves or not
in fact overwhelming amounts of research
have shown i know this is kind of
shocking
that psychiatrists cannot see the future
and so we don't really know whether
someone is going to kill themselves or
not
and so the question sort of becomes well
like why is that
and this is where like research gets to
be really really interesting
we have this kind of idea that when
someone wants to kill themselves
what they do is put their affairs in
order okay
there are signs absolutely we're gonna
get to those
so like they put their affairs in order
because what the media sort of says
right like you like you settle all your
things you like
you know you make sure no one's in the
house you write all your like suicide
notes and things like that
but it turns out that so this there's
sort of this idea that like people kill
themselves like their suicidality kind
of starts out here and then gradually
over time it increases and increases
increases increases and when it gets to
up here this is when you kill yourself
so a lot of people feel reassured right
they kind of say like okay yeah i'm
suicidal but like
i'm over here and since i'm over here
it's okay i don't need to get help yet
because i'm not up here
and all know i need help when i start to
feel worse and things like that
so there's sort of this myth that like
suicidality builds up over time and
people like
make a calculated decision to kill
themselves whereas if you look at the
data
what you actually find is if we look at
the decision
to make the most recent suicide attempt
the most common is that like you know i
i don't know exactly
what the y-axis is here it may be
um number of people so if you look at
like let's say this is like
30 people who tried to kill themselves
what you find is that 12 out of the 30
people
decided to make the attempt within one
minute
of the attempt um you know the vast
majority of people
decided within half an hour or
within two hours to make the attempt so
what we actually discover
um is that like most
of the like attempts of suicide are
actually
drastically impulsive decisions
and what we actually see is out of this
sample
no one was planning suicide for more
than three days
right so like what this means is that if
you guys have been struggling with
suicide
for a long period of time and you think
to yourself
like oh like since i'm not planning it i
don't need to be worried
i know it sounds kind of weird but you
should absolutely be worried because
what the data actually tells us if you
take people who tried to commit suicide
who survived and you ask them this is
how the study was done
when did you make the decision to kill
yourself the vast majority was like
within 60 seconds
and so it this is a kind of another
thing to kind of look at so if you look
at suicidal ideation
over time okay and this is
people like checking their suicidality
like four to eight hours apart
what you basically see is that like the
suicidal score like
is all over the place right so like this
person will be
very suicidal this moment and will be
like
not very suicidal four hours later
so basically like the key takeaway here
is that the first
important myth to address is that like
if you're telling yourself that because
you're not planning to kill yourself
you are safe that's something you need
to be really careful about
so what you want to really do is go see
a clinician either way
like if you've been dealing with
suicidal thoughts for a long time
i know it sounds kind of scary but like
you just never know like
when we come to that sudden defense
breakdown you never know when the stars
will align and like something will crack
through and you will actually make an
attempt
so what i strongly encourage everyone to
do is just because you've been feeling
that way for a long time and nothing
nothing has happened yet is not a
sufficient reason
to not get help so even if you feel like
it hasn't
if you have it under control if you feel
like
you know it hasn't happened yet so
there's a famous saying from the stock
market you know like people in finance
will say that
the stock market past performance is not
an indicator of future gains
right and i think that's absolutely true
of suicidality as well
when we're thinking about performing
like a risk assessment
you know that's not really like that
reassuring because we just know as
clinicians that it's sort of like on a
given day like something may happen in
your mind we don't really know
and you can kind of result in an attempt
so what do we look at as clinicians
so we tend to look at means of access
and this is why means of access is like
the number one protective thing
so if we think about if we now
understand that suicidality
is impulsive and most people decide to
kill themselves within 60 seconds of
making the attempt
having a gun at home is part of the
reason why suicide is like so dang
so much more likely if there's easy
access to an attempt
if you have a gun at home if you if you
can like
make a decision and 60 seconds later you
can actually make the attempt if you
have the means to do that
that's incredibly dangerous so when i
think about like suicidal like
like probabilities what i really try to
protect against
because remember like what we've got is
like your mind
working against you and your mind
working for you so as a clinician what i
really try to do is
buy time for my patients
to like get their head above water and
reach out for help
and so if someone has to you know order
something from the internet
in that 24-hour period their suicidality
will fluctuate and they'll reach out to
me
and they'll say like hey i had like a
really scary like near miss
and then we'll kind of talk about it
we'll help them through it and then they
end up
generally speaking doing well okay
you know when it comes to a risk
assessment we think about things like
and this is for you guys to understand
too if you're thinking about a
particular
there's a big difference between it
would be okay
so let's talk about like the scale of
risk okay
so if i went to bed and i never woke up
i would be fine with that
that's something that we call passive
suicidality it's not that you actually
want to die it's just sort of like
you know if you unplug things like you
would be okay with it
then they're sort of like i wish i went
to bed and never woke up
so at that point it's sort of like a
desire but it's not really like an
intent
right you're not trying to not wake up
it's just like
we move from a passive suicidality to
like sort of a wish
and then the next phase is like i
actually don't want to wake up like i'm
going to try to not wake up
right so then we sort of cross over into
intent which is like scarier
and then like the scariest thing is like
plans and then means
so then like if you kind of think okay i
am going to
not wake up in this particular way right
so like once you start to think about a
plan
that increases your risk of a bad
outcome
and then once that plan becomes
available that's when things get really
scary
and it's usually towards those like
later stages that we sort of really
think about things like hospitalization
you know
just a another important reminder here
that like
you should not be using this risk
assessment to determine
whether you should go see a clinician or
not if you were
anywhere on this axis in any way you
should get a professional evaluation
because we know how to ask questions
that will sort of help us figure out
where you are
because i know hopefully you guys if you
guys have been watching the stream for a
while
a big part of this problem is that
people don't
know what's in their mind right the
whole point of this stream if you think
about like how to benefit
how do people benefit from coming on
stream watching stream
it's that we help you understand the
things that you are not aware of in your
mind
and this is why i cannot urge you more
strongly that if you are
anywhere on the spectrum or even not on
the spectrum
it's completely reasonable and i urge
each and every it doesn't
now that i think about it like just go
get evaluated like even if you don't
think you need to
right because you may be missing
something the other reason to go get
evaluator to reach out for treatment i
know this sounds like absolutely crazy
like it sounds absolutely crazy is that
you don't have to live
in this mindset so for people who are
chronically suicidal and think about
never waking up again
you don't have to live that way right so
like there
are trained professionals whose job
it is to help you through that stuff
and this is the really crazy thing right
is like our mind does this really stupid
thing where it's like
if i can't figure it out no one can
figure it out
it's like i've been dealing with this
for a long time i've read so many books
i've watched so many youtube videos
i haven't figured it out so like i don't
think anyone can help me i'm unhelpable
like they can help other people but i
have tried really hard to figure this
out and i haven't been able to so i
don't really think there's any point
in seeing a professional be careful
because if you have
that thought if you think there is no
point
that is actually you should do the exact
opposite
if you think there is no point to see a
professional you should actually go see
a professional
if you're on that axis you should
absolutely go see a professional
right and when it we'll get to this in a
second in terms of like what you can do
or i guess we can so so now like moving
on to like point number four is like
what do you do
in this situation right so the answer is
gonna be like sort of a broken record
here is like you go get help
so like in the same way that if like if
you've got a flat tire like maybe you
know how to change it to yourself but if
you're let's say your engine is busted
right like you go see a mechanic like
there are as as human beings we have a
society we have a community and we have
a diversification
of our labor pool like if you want to
eat
a burrito you go to a place where people
know how to make burritos or you make it
yourself
right if you wanna you know
get if you've got covid like you go see
a medical doctor because they're gonna
help you with covid
you go to the appropriate person for the
appropriate thing and if you're dealing
with feelings of hopelessness or
suicidal thoughts the appropriate place
to go because there's a profession of
people whose job it is
and who's been spending years of their
life to train and get good at helping
you
so you should go see them right and be
careful about all of the reasons
that your mind may populate and if your
mind populates these reasons
then you should really like notice that
and recognize that this could be
a process a part of like the negative
process
so if your mind is telling you there's
no point if there's your mind is telling
you that you don't deserve help
and that you deserve to feel this way
because you're such a pos
and you like you know like other people
deserve help but you don't deserve help
like that's like just recognize that and
then don't give
in to that so i know this sounds kind of
weird but i encourage all of you all to
really think about
what is it that dictates your life do
you want to live a life that's based on
like what your emotions tell you and
i know it sounds kind of weird but based
on what your thoughts tell you
because the mind is just a thinking
machine it just generates thoughts it
generates all kinds of random crap
like your mind will say like i want a
burrito or it'll say like i want to play
dota
or like i don't want to do this and do
you want to listen
to your mind so be careful right because
sometimes you want to listen to your
mind and sometimes you don't
but you don't want your mind and your
emotions to be in control of you
you want to be in control of them
so the last thing that i'm going to kind
of talk about is like you know
this sentiment that you can handle it is
not a sufficient reason
to this is not the last thing this is
the second last thing um
the sentiment that you can handle it is
not a sufficient reason
to not see a mental health professional
because it's just dangerous like
statistically it's very dangerous
the last thing that i'm going to talk a
little bit about is like how to help
someone
else who is dealing with suicidality
so this is really tricky because a lot
of times people in our community are
like
good people and you try to help other
people out which is awesome
right like we love that it's part of the
reason that we're here like our discord
has a lot of people that try to help
each other out our subreddit has like
people posting about their problems
and like other people post on the
subreddit to try to support them it's
like fantastic like
it's really great it's beautiful we have
coaches who will also like you know are
also kind of trained in our
methodologies or
specifically there to help you out and
and that seems to be going really well
um i had that i had the privilege of
dropping into a
coaching group this morning and and it
was fun to really see like
you know how their how people are
progressing
so the last thing is like you may have a
friend who is struggling with suicidal
thoughts so the first thing to
understand is that like
a lot of people feel like i don't know
how to help them or they won't let me
help them which is
sort of fair because it's i know it
sounds kind of weird but like it's your
job to be their friend not their doctor
so a lot of times i notice that people
get really kind of like frustrated or
they feel like really like stressed out
because they're trying to
fix this person's suicidality they're
trying to like because it's like so
scary and you want to fix it
but you're just not trained or capable
and so i know it sounds kind of weird
but like you shouldn't
stress about that right so like fixing
someone's suicidality
is not your job as a friend you're not
trained in it so you i mean i guess you
can kind of give it a shot but like
i wouldn't really recommend that really
your job
as a friend is to be their friend and
support them through it so this is where
it's like
encouraging them to actually get help
because this is huge
where a lot of times people won't want
to get help for any number of reasons
because they feel ashamed so like you
know you can kind of support them
through that sometimes it's like
practical like
you know their their mental is not
functioning properly so that like they
just don't have the wherewithal to like
sit down and like
call around and try to find an
appointment so you may be able to help
with that like it's kind of crazy but
you could ask them
hey would you like my help in making an
appointment like
because 60 minutes from now like you
could have two appointments
we can make you know one phone call
every six minutes and we can make 10
phone calls
and out of those 10 phone calls it's
there's a decent chance that
20 percent of the people like will have
availability
so it's going to be an uphill battle
because in the mind of the depressed
person in the mind of the hopeless
person they may muster up the courage
to make one phone call but when like you
know they don't get an appointment they
kind of give up
so as a friend you can help them get
into treatment you can encourage them to
get into treatment you can support them
to get into treatment
the second thing is don't underestimate
the power of being a friend
so while you may not be able to actually
treat their suicidality and nor should
you try
don't underestimate the value of you
caring about them
right because in their mind remember
that there's an equation between
pro-suicidal factors
and anti-suicidal factors but like
one of the things that you're doing
there just by being their friend and
even like i know it sounds kind of weird
but like
i'll even say this as a psychiatrist
like it's one of the most powerful
things that i've like learned how to say
like when i'm dealing with patients with
trauma you know they'll tell me about
all this terrible stuff
that happened to them and it's like
we're 10 years later
and i can't do anything about that and
just sharing
how much i wish i could like you know
because really the
cure for this person is for me to invent
a time machine go back in time and
protect
that from protect them from like that
ever happening
that's the cure and i wish i could do
that but i can't
and i'm actually completely powerless in
this situation to like
take that trauma away from them and
being able to share that with them
because like instead of like
you know you trying to help them you're
actually joining them in the
hopelessness
and then what happens once you join them
in the hopelessness is like
both the all are down there together
and you all are hopeless together so at
least you can't change time you can't
change the past
they can't change the past either but at
least both they all are down there
and like they're not shouldering that
powerlessness
on their own you're helping them carry
that powerlessness
too and so then once you kind of get
down there in there with them and you
say like hey i can't take this away from
you i wish i could
but i'd like to try to help you in some
way what can we do
what can we do and that's really the
most important question you can ask as a
friend
right and then like meet them where
they're at and try to like help them
like if they if it's sort of like can i
make phone calls for you can i help you
get into treatment like
what can i do you know what is it that
you would like to do that you're not
able to do
and sometimes it's like other kinds of
things right it's like hey let's play
like
let's make phone calls for 30 minutes
and then like we'll play like
one game of league and then like
depend after that like we'll take a
break and we'll make phone calls for
another 30 minutes
and then like we're gonna keep doing
that until you have
two appointments and then we'll
you know there's a lot that you can do
as a friend so remember that your dharma
as their friend is to be their friend
it's not to cure them
and so be careful about what you're
capable of and what you're signing up
for
oh so let's actually start with kind of
a quick summary so today we're talking a
little bit about suicidality
and how to understand it so we started
off by talking about
you know who suicide affects who has
suicidal thoughts
kind of how that works we sort of talked
a little bit about how
women may be more likely to attempt
suicide although men are more likely to
complete suicide successfully
about 80 percent of suicides are men
we also talked a little bit about why
that statistic may be different
um so some of it may have to do with the
means of suicidality like women are more
likely to try to overdose
which means that the the window for
medical intervention in the window to
save that person's life
is a lot greater than using something
like a gun which men are more likely to
use guns women are more likely to try
overdose 5 pills
so we talked a little bit about
statistics i suspect that there's more
to it than that
i think that there's something going on
in terms of like why men are so much
more likely to kill themselves
the second thing that we kind of talked
a little bit about is like you know why
do
people kill themselves and as we sort of
get into the
the mechanisms to recognize that
suicidality is a symptom
it's not a diagnosis and that
suicidality is
born out of all kinds of psychopathology
as well as potentially like
psychological
complexes that are not necessarily a
discrete medical illness
brain malfunction or neurochemistry
imbalance
so we talked a little bit about diseases
like major depressive disorder bipolar
disorder addiction
sometimes things like trauma but also
that when you actually sit down and talk
to people with suicidality what you
discover is that
sometimes they want to kill themselves
because they don't feel like life is
worth living
that their dreams have been shattered
and they don't really feel like they can
ever put things together again
sometimes people kill themselves because
they have an immense amount of
self-hatred and it's not that
life can't be put back together it's
that they don't deserve to live a life
that is like put together
sometimes it's born of things like envy
and humiliation and shame
and sometimes what can actually happen
is is we always sort of have this war
going on in our mind
between reasons to live and reasons to
not live
and sometimes we can have acute events
that will sort of shatter some of our
defense mechanisms that help keep us
alive
and sometimes i'll see this especially
in the case of disinhibition through
substances
so like you know if you think about
alcohol alcohol will make you more
likely to do things that you wouldn't do
if you were like level-headed
and suicidality includes that so like
the number of suicide attempts that i've
seen
under the influence of alcohol is like
staggering it's like through the roof
and then we sort of talked a little bit
about
you know how to think about suicidality
so we talked a little bit about risk
assessment
and the main takeaway here is that
regardless of how suicidal you've been
if you've had those kinds of thoughts or
you're currently having those kinds of
thoughts you should absolutely go get
help it's a no-brainer
and a big reason for that is one of the
most common myths behind suicide
suicide which is that people like really
plan it out right it's like weeks and
weeks of careful planning and i'm gonna
do this and
settle my affairs in order whereas if
you look at the research
at least in one study no one planned
more than three days
and like the vast majority like 50 or
more 60
70 80 percent of people made the
decision within two hours
and about 30 of the people made the
decision within 60 seconds so the reason
you should go get help is because
you never know when your mind is going
to change and the last thing that we
talked a little bit about is okay like
so what do we do about it right
if you're struggling with these thoughts
like the short answer is get help
recognize that there are all kinds of
thoughts in your head that will prevent
you from getting help
and if you're having those thoughts
that's not a reason to not get help in
fact it's the very opposite
so sometimes your mind may be telling
you things like no one will be able to
help because i haven't been able to fix
it myself
your mind may be telling you i don't
deserve help and if you have any of
those thoughts you should actually get
help
because you're having those thoughts and
the last thing is you know how do you
support someone else the short answer is
get them into treatment
and in terms of how you do that it's
supporting them sometimes through like a
very practical hey do you want me to
like google stuff for you
can we make phone calls together and
sometimes it's just being their friend
because it's your job to be their friend
it's not your job to be their doctor
and a lot of times people get really
bent out of shape and stressed out
because they try to
be their doctor when you just can't
you're not trained to do that nor should
you
i don't i don't play doctor i i don't
accept patients that are friends of mine
so like you know people who have working
relationships with people who are my
friends people who are my family like i
won't be their doctor
i will send them to someone else
so that's our quick talk about suicide i
hope it's been helpful
you know the goal of having this talk is
because as we looked at earlier
we are sort of losing the war against
mental illness we are losing the war
against suicide and despite
many advances in medicine despite you
know a lot of new pharmaceutical
medications and things like that
some of which i've really seen like
clinically do a fantastic job
um i really have seen some patients with
depression who've tried like
five or six medications and a new drug
comes comes on the market
it really does turn things around for
them so it's great that like we have all
these advances and at the same time
you know the suicide has like increased
as a cause of death by like 33
over the last like 20 years i believe
whereas like you know deaths due to
cancer and heart disease and stuff like
that have gone down by 20 to 40 percent
and so the the first you know we're
going to start by educating on
educating y'all right so we as a
community need to understand more about
suicide
we need to understand like what it looks
like what it feels like what to do
with it and i encourage all you all to
get some help because
the the you know the biggest the most
common thing that i hear from my
patients
who are reluctant to engage in mental
health is like i wish i had done this
sooner
because some of them will just i mean
you guys will hopefully realize this too
that you just don't have to live like
this it's like
you know like you can fix this like you
can feel
better on a day-to-day basis like the
sun can be a little bit brighter you can
be a little bit happier
you can just enjoy things more you can
actually live life with like more
motivation
and like food can taste better and all
you have to do is just
get a little bit of help because
someone's asking a question
what if you don't have money so
um it depends a little bit on where you
live but
uh you know most places actually have
most places meaning like even countries
like so the u.s basically has
free mental health clinics or community
mental health clinics
in most like cities actually so
i don't think people realize this but
like you can just do like community
mental health center
and you call the community mental health
center and you say hey i have no money
i'm depressed can you guys help me
you'll be surprised because there are
all kinds of programs out there right so
we also have programs like rise above
the disorder
um or rad which is like you know a
gaming non-profit that supports like
gamers and actually
pays for their treatment through like
scholarships and grants
so there are non-profit organizations
out there that'll help
there are community mental health
centers that are helped just call them
up and ask
so i wouldn't let that be a barrier
okay so what's a good way i can open up
to a clinic or therapist about this kind
of topic without making it seem like i
am in
immediate danger but it is still a very
serious ongoing issue
so it is their job so my job as a
clinician is to keep people out of the
hospital right like the hospital is like
a last resort
it's not a first resort and so i would
say
just share that with them just say like
hey
i'm not in any immediate danger but this
is a very serious issue and i'm afraid
that you're gonna think i'm in immediate
danger just tell them
they'll be like okay cool thank you for
sharing that that's like one of the most
reassuring things that i can hear as a
psychiatrist oh great this patient is
taking this
seriously good
that means i can rely on them i can
trust them they respect the enemy that
they're
facing uh someone's asking why do you
not want to be a doctor for people that
you know
so being a doctor is about being
objective
right so what i want to do is like not
let my emotions
get in the way of like my clinical
training and when personal
relationships arise emotions and other
kinds of boundary issues arise that like
make it hard for me to actually
function as a competent doctor so there
have been numerous studies
done that show that physicians who
treat family members are more likely to
miss diagnoses
than like arando from the street
ah so what if your friend doesn't want
you to get them help how do you convince
them otherwise
that's a great question you don't
convince them otherwise
so this is sort of where like what i
would encourage you to do is like
instead of trying to convince them to
get help
ask them why they don't want help
so anytime
so anytime you have a disagreement with
someone
i think we try too hard in this society
to like
convince instead of understand and i
want you guys to just pay attention to
any argument like i
really wish i could so i i anyway i wish
i could share something with you but i
can't but
so like i want you guys to just pay
attention to any argument and like think
about the arguments in your life
where you try to convince someone and
they try to convince you
what happens like
it doesn't work whereas it's kind of
interesting because if you try to
understand
them they will automatically
empathically like their
some circuit in their brain will flip
where they will try to understand you
you know and and so it's kind of
interesting because i wouldn't try to
convince them
but i would still like state your
perspective and you can say like hey i
see you suffering
it hurts me to see you suffering i care
about you i think this would help
but if you don't want to like you know i
can't make you
can you help me understand why you don't
want help
because there may be something there
that needs to be addressed right so
someone else is asking
what if i'm afraid of my parents not
knowing or my parents knowing
so like there may be something like that
where they're like you know they have
some fear like they're afraid
that they're gonna be hospitalized or
they're afraid they're gonna you know
get kicked off of like whatever team
they're on or they're afraid that
um you know their parents will find out
and so then you can kind of like help
them work through that right like you
can be like okay so like what
you know what are you afraid of your
parents knowing what are you afraid of
in terms of reaction or do you think
that they're not going to be supportive
you think they're going to call you weak
you think they're going to punish you
for it
and then like you know then the
conversation sort of becomes like we can
maybe talk about you know parents who
are against mental health treatment at
some point
the conversation then becomes like you
know what's more important to you
i know it sounds kind of weird but like
you know when i work with
kids who whose parents aren't supportive
of mental health treatment
it's actually like really amazing to see
what happens because the kid actually
like
we work to the point where like they can
be strong about it and it's sort of like
my parents may react poorly and i can't
control that but that's on them
and i'm not going to let the opinions of
my parents
dictate the life that i lead and that's
hard like it's it requires a lot of like
internal fortitude and support from the
outside
to get to that point where you can let
your parents know and sometimes we'll
even coach people
into how how to have a conversation with
your parents so when you tell your
parents hey by the way like
i want to see a therapist they'll be
like
you don't need that and then like once
again
don't try to convince them right so
you're you ask the question you ask them
like
what do you think i'm feeling and what
do you think i need
and they'll be like you know
and just listen and be like okay i see
so you think i'm feeling unmotivated
because
i got a b
how would how would like how would that
like how would you
so you think that i don't need therapy
because you think
this is just a temporary part of
adolescence
if i were to tell you that what i'm
feeling is very different from your what
you're describing
if i'm feeling something that's very
different from what you think i'm
feeling
would that change your mind about
whether seeing a therapist is
appropriate or not
it's kind of like a weird question right
because they're like
it's kind of a weird question it's like
a hard question to answer because if
they say
and then you may even get to therapy
doesn't do anything
and then you can ask them like what's
your like help me understand why you
think therapy doesn't do anything what
do you base that on
where does that come from
and just have a conversation with your
parents and then like even i i've had
like you know people working with super
religious parents who will be like
you know you just need to go to church
more like like you know
mental weakness can be solved through
through god
so you can say like okay so what's your
understanding about like why
people like you know why the profession
of psychiatry exists and then the answer
can be something like well
it's because people have gotten away
from god
and then you can be like okay so
do you think that like seeing a
therapist necessarily means that i've
moved away from god
or can i do both like what do you think
about me trying it
and like just being open-minded and
seeing what the deal is
and oddly enough when you approach i've
approached
very religious parents in that way and
found them to be
you know like quite receptive it's
bizarre
you know and even as a psychiatrist like
sometimes like they'll come into my
office right and they'll be like
prepared to do battle and so you just
listen to them
you can be like yeah like i completely
agree would it surprise you guys
that i spent seven years training to
become a monk before i became a
psychiatrist
i actually agree with you that a lot of
the reason that's that mental health is
getting worse in this country
is because we've lost some element of
spirituality and
i think that like god puts out like
gives us like
a lot of options right like and so we
should use
everything at our disposal
it's crazy like they'll be like and i'm
like do you guys think i'm evil
you just ask him and they're like no you
seem like a nice guy and i'm like okay
so like how do you guys feel about your
son coming and seeing me once a week for
an hour
and we're just like going to talk about
stuff they're like
okay i'm like you guys can come
once a month too and let's just check in
like when you guys drop him off if you
guys have any concerns
you can let me know and they're like
okay like it's really strange but i i
think just
you know if you have someone who's
resistant to being convinced
don't try to convince them try to
understand them
right and try to find some common ground
like because it's there like just
because they don't want to see a
therapist for some reason
does not mean that you know they they
may they may
want to avoid therapy for a reason but
they may want therapy for another reason
so it's about sitting with them in that
space this is why it's kind of
interesting
that you know one of the outcomes we're
now measuring from our coaching program
is like how good our coaches are at
getting people into therapy
because a lot of people a lot of times
for whatever reason you all feel more
comfortable working with a coach than a
therapist
therapist will work with you for a
little while like asriel is a good
example if you guys caught that
interview he like
was in coaching for a little while like
went to therapy for a while and then
came back to coaching and he seems to be
doing way better
the two are complementary yeah so what
if you're dealing with someone who's
psychotic so the other thing that i
for the sake of completing this i really
should have included is if you think
that someone is at like imminent risk to
themselves
it's absolutely appropriate to call
whatever emergency services
nine one one one one two like if you
think someone is like actually gonna
hurt themselves y'all should absolutely
just
call 9-1-1 or whatever the emergency
services
um and
and like you know because
like if someone someone asked a question
like what if someone is psychotic like
if someone is high on drugs or psychotic
and like
or something like that like you should
just call an ambulance
and get that person to an emergency room
because that's what
the doctors in the emergency room are
there for which is you know most of my
bread and butter when i work overnight
shifts in the ed
and it's really fantastic like i'm so
glad that you know someone picked up the
phone and like
made a phone call because they're going
to come i mean there's a decent chance
they're going to wind up in the
emergency room either way
and it's just going to be like you know
if their friend called
then we've got a good shot at saving
this person's life and
if no one calls then we have less of a
shot at saving this person's life
and i can also say that you know i would
say
90 percent of people that get
hospitalized
are grateful that they were hospitalized
when they leave in my experience
i wish it was 99 but honestly it's 90.
10 of people really dislike it yeah so
someone's saying i feel like i'm where
reckful was that they died i don't know
where to go
seriously dude i'd pick up a dude or
woman or
you know whatever you identify as i i'd
pick up the phone and i'd call 9-1-1
if you guys are where he was you'd pick
up the phone call
seriously that's like that's the only
answer if you're aware he was